---
published: false
layout: post
title: Going Open Source with Github
description: How to prepare an open source repo in Github
author: nadun
image: assets/images/git.png
---
Open source softwares means an free softwares that anyone can use for the development or for business. These are published under open source licences so other developers can read and use those softwares for their projects as well.

There are many advantages of open source softwares such as,

- Lower total cost of ownership
- Use modern software development practices
- Reduce duplicated effort
- Force multiplier
- Attract talents

And many more.

You can find more from [here](https://opensource.com/life/15/12/why-open-source)

## How to be open

In this article we are going to discuss about main areas that needs to prepare an open source project using github.

Working progress - need a good method to track down what you are doing and what need to be done.

Progress plan and making milestones will make your life easier while your project develops with the time.

Development tracker and organizing tools like Github projects and waffle.io can be used as hacks to make your lives easier.

### Documentation

**As a Contributor**- for contributors need a proper documentation how to contribute for the project, we can use a changelog, future plans for development, rules and the way you accept PRs (Pull Requests). Use CONTRIBUTING.md, README.md to inform community about the project and how to contribute.

**As a user**-can write a WiKi or a documentation(user manual) that explains how to use the product. Need to be clear and understandable.
Issues

Issues need to be submitted in the github under issues in your repository. These issues will be help for the persons who are interested to contribute to your repository as where to contribute and what is the solution you expect.

Moreover waffle.io can be used for project issues tracking - [waffle.io](https://waffle.io/)

### Community

Good community is a crucial thing for an open source project. you can manage and keep in touch with the community using services such as github and Gitter chat. Gitter is a chat service where all the developers and contributors of the project discuss their problem and progress of the development in open. Anyone who enters to the chat can see the conversation.

Another smart move is opening a topic under your project in Stack-overflow. Then developers can discuss about the questions and improvements under your project.

### Tryout demo

Try out demo can be another help for developers and users to understand the problem you are addressing from your project and how it works in easy and more efficient way. Try out demo can be a hosted site, API or anything that demos your project.

Furthermore github pages can be used to make host static web files of your demos.

### Marketing

Marketing is a crucial factor that decides whether your project is a success or not.

> What is the point of having an open source project without introducing it for the community?

Without marketing, nobody knows what you have built and benefits of using your project. Good marketing will lead your project for good community and contributions.

In order to be open, the first and main factor a person required is the mindset that prepares to share his knowledge with other developers. However, some might think this as a bold move not because the person is sharing his knowledge but because the amount of money that person can earn from selling the idea. However, benefits like recognition among open source culture is something that you cannot take from money.

Few repos that you can use as examples:

- [serverless](https://github.com/serverless/serverless)
- [joomla](https://github.com/joomla/joomla-cms)


I hope this article helped you to have an brief idea about how to start an open source project with Github.

references: [why open source](https://opensource.com/life/15/12/why-open-source)
